Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P79dswRi9ds
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_161_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_17_%26_18_-_Bhava_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=P79dswRi9ds&redir_token=AAUE0Rzg9WApFVAIGhfxmey1mpd8MTU0ODQ5MDYyMUAxNTQ4NDA0MjIx

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we are moving
from, you know, sadhana-bhakti to bhava-bhakti. So, you know, the eastern ocean,
waves inside the ocean has multiple waves. So, sadhana-bhakti. There is, there
is, generally, the first introduction to bhakti is there. Then, there is
sadhana-bhakti. Then, there is bhava-bhakti. And there is prema-bhakti. You
know. So, in sadhana-bhakti, there was "vaidhi-bhakti". And there was
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, the major chunk of the wave of sadhana-bhakti was
"vaidhi-bhakti". You know. There are a few chapters about "rāgānugā-bhakti".
Now, we are moving down to bhava-bhakti. So, bhava-bhakti seva, Prabhupada
translates as ecstatic love. You know. So, Chapter 17 and 18 are about
bhava-bhakti. And Chapter 19, you know, you know, which will be the last chapter
we discussed, will be, you know, prema-bhakti. You know. You know. So, let us
look at bhava-bhakti. You know. So, you know:

"By the process of executing regulated devotional service"

That is sadhana-bhakti.

"one is actually elevated to the transcendental stage, beyond the material modes
of nature."

You know. And then, gradually, as a devotee advances, Prabhupada says that the
devotee comes to the platform of "uttama-adhikārī", attains perfect devotion.
And then, Srila Prabhupada uses some interesting terms over here. Which we need
to understand.

"Within the stage of the regulative principles of devotional service there are
two divisions – namely, executive and effective. "

So, let us see what this "executive and effective" means. So, here, we will go
back to the waves of devotion. You know. You know. You know. So, here, we start
with Chapter 17. Let us look at the definition of, you know, "bhava-bhakti". So:

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā
        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk
        rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-
        kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

So, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, "śuddha-sattva" is pure goodness.
"viśeṣātmā". So, you know, the, you know, you know, nature. So, "ātmā" can refer
to the soul. But "ātmā" can also refer to nature. So, because we have a
spiritual nature. "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā".
"prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk". "prema-sūryāṁśu". So, you know, "sūrya" is sun.
"aṁśu" is a ray. So, "sūryāṁśu" refers to a ray of the sun. So, here, there is
an implicit metaphor. "prema". Love for Krishna. Which is the final stage. This
is bhava. This is penultimate stage. You know. So, "bhava-sūryāṁśu", sorry,
"prema-sūryāṁśu". So, "prema" is like the Sun. And, you know, "bhava" is like
the, you know, ray of the sun. "sāmya-bhāk". "sāmya-bhāk" means similar to.
"rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-". "rucibhiś". "rucibhiś" means there are variou...,
"ruci" is taste. There are various tastes that is, manifest in the heart of such
a devotee. And "citta-masṛṇya-". "masṛṇya" is there is softness of the heart
that comes up by this. "kṛd asau". That which causes "bhāva ucyate". So, what is
"bhāva"? "bhāva" is that, let us look at this one by one answer here now. So:

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā
        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk
        rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-
        kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

"śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, when there is pure goodness, you know,
"śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". That which has the characteristic of pure goodness.
That is the first line. The second line is "sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk". That which is
like the ray of sun. And then, "citta-masṛṇya-". There is so..., softness of the
heart that results. Along with various stage. "rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-". So, let
us look at these one by one now. So, with the first point that is mentioned,
"śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". Now, what, we know the word "sattva". "sattva" is
goodness. So, there are three modes. There is "tama". "raja". And "sattva". We
have discussed this elaborately in our Bhagavad Gita, especially in Chapter 14.
So, now, "sattva" and "śuddha-sattva" are different. Because "sattva" is still
material. "śuddha-sattva" is transcendental. "śuddha" means pure.
Uncontaminated. So, in this world, even goodness is considered contaminated.
Because still, it is a material mode. "śuddha-sattva" is not material. It is
transcendental. And in "śuddha-sattva", there are two characteristics. What are
those two characteristics? You know. Krishna has many internal energies, also.
So, among them, two primary energies are "saṁvit". And "hlādinī". Which are
relevant over here. "saṁvit". "saṁvit" means, "vit" means knowledge. "saṁvit"
means that which gives knowledge. You know. The knowledge potency of the Lord.
And "hlādinī" is pleasure. So, actually, that pleasure is not just sensual
pleasure. That is devotional pleasure. So, that which gives pleasure through
love. And that which gives knowledge for love. That is "saṁvit". And "hlādinī".
Now, "śuddha-sattva" is said to be composed of these two character..., two. In
fact, if we see, you know, that even "sattvaa", you know, is having two
characteristics. There is "jñāna-saṅgena cānagha":

        sukha-saṅgena badhnāti
        jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

When Krishna talks about the, introduces the three modes of material nature. And
He talks about goodness. He says it as through characteristics. There is
"sukha". And there is "jñāna". And because both are these material. Both of
these are material. Material knowledge. And material happiness. So, they bind
the soul to material existence.

        sukha-saṅgena badhnāti
        jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

So, now, when we talk about this, you know, in pure goodness. So, there is,
there is pure happiness. And there is pure knowledge. So, the pure knowledge is
the knowledge about Krishna. So, when "śuddha-sattva" is manifested, what
happens is, the devotee's heart becomes illumined with knowledge about Krishna.
And that knowledge, there is cog..., you know, we can say cognition. And
affection. We want to use other words. So, "hlād...", "saṁvit-shakti" is
cognition potency. And "hlādinī-shakti" is affection potency. That affection
naturally being satisfaction. Now, if, whenever we want to do anything. You
know. Suppose, a person wants to, say, play a, you know, sitar. Now, what all
are required? First of all, there is knowledge that is required. Ok. How is
sitar to be played? Then, there is something, there is the instrument. The sitar
has, sitar has, also has to be, that we played. And then, after that, there has
to be, you know, you know, you know, the person should have the desire to play.
And that desire comes when there is some sort of pleasure. Either that person
enjoys playing it. Or that person nat..., wants to play for somebody else. And
that person will appreciate. Or that person will pay. Or whatever. So, there is
some sort of, you know, desire which binds the person. That is, that we could
call roughly as affection. So, we get, do that. And we get some pleasure. So, in
any activity that we do, there is knowledge of how to do it. There is the
facility for doing it. And then, there is the, you know, there is the attraction
to do it. There is affection for doing it. Which may be because we like it in
itself. Or because we like something that we will get by that activity. So,
these three shaktis can be understood thus. That they are integral to any
activity that we do, even in the material world. So, "saṁvit" means the
knowledge of how to do something. So, for example, now, we are having this
online course. So, somebody wants to join the course, does not know much about
internet. So, first is, one has to have knowledge. Ok. How, how do I go to a
particular site? How do I turn on the video? Whatever. Then, after that, there
is, you know. there is "hlādinī". Ok. I, sorry, "saṁv...", that is "saṁvit". I
have to know. And then, there is "sandhinī". "sandhinī" is that which provides
the facility. Ok. Then, I have to have some internet connection. I have to have
some device. Which plays audio. Or video. And then, after that, there has to be
the "hlādinī". Ok. If I am doing something, actually, I get some pleasure out of
it. Otherwise, I will not do it. And there is some, generally, when, when, how
do we get a pleasure out of something? When there is some sort of relationship.
We like something about that thing, then we get pleasure. So, now, the, all
this, these examples are material. But in the spiritual world, you know, you
know, when we say that, thta there is pure love. And pure happiness. How does
that love and happiness come about? That is by Krishna's special mercy. And, but
that, Krishna's special mercy, you know, is not just "amorphous". Krishna's
mercy is personal. You know. So, all these three are actually Krishna's mercy,
only. You know. "saṁvit". "sandhinī". "hlādinī" are all Krishna's mercy. And
they all enable us to serve Him better. And better. You know. You know.

So, "saṁvit" is the shakti which is the, which knowledge-giving potency. Then,
in the "sandhinī", the facilities which are there. So, that is not directly
relevant to "śuddha-sattva". The facilities are there. Even the facilities in
the material world can be used for serving Krishna. You know. We can, we can
have a land. And we can build a temple over there. You know. We have our tongue.
And we can use it to glorify Krishna. So, the facilities are there anyway in the
material world. What needs to be chaned is, our knowledge of how they are meant
to be used. And the, you know, affection that we have. The attraction that we
have. We redirect it from the things of this world to the Lord who is beyond
the world. To the transcendental Lord. So, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". At the
stage of "bhāva-bhakti", one's knowledge. And one's affection. One's cognition.
And one's affection are redirected from matter to spirit. Not just spirit in
terms of "brahmayoti". But spirit in terms of the supreme spiritual reality.
Krishna. And when this happens, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, just as one is
spontaneously attracted towards worldly things, and delights in world things. In
the sat..., in the conditioned stage, similarly, in the stage of "bhāva-bhakti",
one is attracted towards Krishna. And one delights in Krishna.

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

Then:

        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk

So, "prema-sūryāṁśu". That it is like a ray of the sun. "Rūpa Gosvāmī" also uses
the word "prema-ankur". "ankur means seed. Just like from a seed, the whole
tree blossoms. So, like that, this is the seed of love of God. And, you know,
"ankur". From here, the love of God will manifest. Soon. "sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk".
It is similar in quality. So, actually, between "bhāva" and "prema", there is
qualitative identity. But there is a difference in quantitative intensity. You
know. Ray of light can also give some illumination. Some warmth. But it is a
very tiny, you know, level of warmth that we get. But when there is, you know,
the full sun, then the amount of light that one gets from it is enormous. It is
complete..., it is complete illumination that comes by that. So, like that, you
know, now, when we say that, at the level of "bhāva", there is the this, that,
essential is the emotions that we are experiencing are pure spiritual. Rich.
They are connected with Krishna. But at the same time, the intensity is not as
much. Now, we may think that, ok, as compared to a sun, you know, sun is so
vast. And one ray is so small. So, then, "bhāva" is nothing very great. No.
"bhāva" is a very exalted stage. It is actually the stage beyond, way, way
beyond "anartha-nivṛttiḥ". "niṣṭhā". "ruciḥ". "āsaktiḥ". "bhāva". It is just
before "prema". It is a very, very exalted stage. And from the perspective of
"prema", it is lesser. But from our perspective, it is very exalted. And, so,
Prabhupada calls it, this level, also, as the level of "uttama-adhikārī". Now,
"prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk". And then, after that, it is described "rucibhiś
citta-masṛṇya-". "rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-" means one gets, you know, taste. And
then, that, when different kinds of taste one gets. And the heart becomes very
soft. Soft means what? That whenever there are any devotional stimuli.
Immediately, the devotee becomes, you know, flooded with devotional emotions.
The classic example of this is Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. You know. He would
just see, somewhere, you know, some river, and he would think, oh, this is
Yamuna. And want to go, run. And jump into that river. And get the sangha of,
you know, Krishna through His beloved river. Yamuna Devi. So, the
"citta-masṛṇya-". of course, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is not at the level of
"bhāva". He said the highest level of "prema". But I am just giving an example
of softness of heart over here. To understand the concept. "citta-masṛṇya-". And
then, at that stage, when this happens, then "kṛd asau bhāva ucyate". "kṛd
asau". The, when these things happen, then that is called as "bhāva". You know.
So, let us look at this a little bit more now. Now, how can "bhāva" be invoked?
So, Prabhupada writes, there is, as I read this over there:

"Within the stage of the regulative principles of devotional service there are
two divisions – namely, executive and effective."

So, you know, you know, so, here, Prabhupada is re..., using the words
"effective". And "exe...", "executive". So, executive refers to sadhana.
"sadhana-bhakti". And "bhāva" refers to effective. Why? Because we have to, in
the stages, stage of, you know, sadhana-bhakti, we are executing devotional
service. We are practicing devotional service. So that by the practice of
devotional service, we move forward. In our gra..., spiritual life. Gradually.
And then, there is effective. Effective means that which is, you know, you know,
that which is the effect. So that Prabhupada is using the word "effective" here
in a slightly different sense. Normally, effective, we use to say that, ok, it,
it produces the effect. But here, Srila Prabhupada uses the word, it is the
effect. So, what is the effect? The effect is "bhāva". So, by the practice of
sadhana-bhakti, "bhāva-bhakti" will come. By the practice of sadhana-bhakti,
which is the executive part of bhakti, we execute sadhana-bhakti. And by that,
the effect manifests. That is "bhāva-bhakti". So, now, when "bhāva-bhakti"
manifests. And "bhāva-bhakti" is practiced. "bhāva-bhakti" is done, that can be
done in multiple ways. So, let us look at this over here. So, "bhāva-bhakti",
so, "uttama-bhakti", which is actually, it can be "cesta-rupa". And
"bhāva-rupa". "cesta-rupa" means by endeavors. And by emotions. So, I shall
explain this. "cesta-rupa". Srila Prabhupada talks about it, you know, in his
purp..., in his, you know, summary study, also. And we will see how it will be 
mentioned. And in "cesta-rupa", there is sadhana. And there is sadhya. Sadhana
is endeavors that cause "bhāva". And endeavors that are the effect of "bhāva".
So, endeavors that cause "bhāva". That is sadhana. And sadhya is that endeavors
that are the effect of "bhāva". So, here, Srila Prabhupada is essentially
talking, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is essentially talking about the different
categories. In which, we can experience "bhāva-bhakti". So, "cesta-rupa" means
one is endeavoring. And one, at that stage, what it, what, that endeavor is not
exactly like material endeavor that a person does to get material results. No.
It is an entirely different category of endeavor. It is, actually, one already
has very rich intense emotions for Krishna. Do you remember? This is already
something which is achieved after "rāgānugā-bhakti". And at "rāgānugā" itself,
one has spontaneous devotion. So, this is more advanced than that. So, it is
certainly very special. So, here, "cesta-rupa" essentially refers to, you know,
so, this, Srila Prabhupada uses this word "cesta-rupa" to explain, you know, you
know, that one does "cesta" by which "bhāva" is developed. Or one does "cesta"
after "bhāva" is developed. That means there is the external aspect. And
internal aspect. So, the emotions are primary, then it is "bhāva-rupa". And
then, "cesta-rupa" means the endeavors. The actions are primary. But either way,
the imp..., important point is that this is all "bhāva-bhakti". Now, moving
forward, so, the primary characteristic is, so, if we go back to the definition.

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā
        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk

So, like we discussed earlier, the, you know, the primary characteristic. And
the secondary characteristic. The "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". And "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So,
the primary characteristic is "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". That there is the
descent of the mode of goodness. And then, "citta-masṛṇya-". That there is
softening of the heart, is the secondary characteristic. So, these are both the
characteristics of "bhāva-bhakti". You know. Now, how does "bhāva-bhakti"
develop? So, now, there are, actually, now, "rucibhiś", "rucibhiś
citta-masṛṇya-". So, what are these three typos of "ruci"? There is
"prapti-abhilasa". "anukulya-abhilasa". And "sauharda-abhilasa". So, let us look
at these one by one. "prapti-abhilasa". You know. That is the desire to achieve
Krishna. So, one has not yet come in the association of Krishna until now. But
one feels deeply, you know, attached. You know. The "abhilasa". Desire is
something which is a, little bit, you know, it is not a, it is, we have so many
desires. But aspiration is a much deeper. It is a clo..., it is a desire that is
very close to our hearts. It is a cherished desire. That is the, normally, the
way word "abhilasa" is used. In English, the best translation of "abhilasa" is
aspiration. I aspire for doing something. So, if that, what we aspire for is
normally something very great. Very wonderful. And then, we hold it at a high
pedestrian in our heart. And we cherish it. So, there is "prapti-abhilasa".
There is the desire to attain Krishna. Then, there is "anukulya-abhilasa". That
is the desire to, you know, please Krishna. So, now, the desire to please
Krishna, you know, we can say that it is always there.

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

That right from the beginning itself, there is "ānukūlya". There is the desire
to, you know, "bhāva-bhakti" is that which involves activity for pleasing
Krishna. That is true. But here, the realisation of Krishna is much mo...,
deeper. You know. One is able to perceive Krishna as a person. And as a person,
one wants to do things that will please Krishna. So, "anukulya-abhilasa". And
then, there is "sauharda-bhilasa". "sauharda-abhilasa" means one wants to keep
Krishna close to the heart. One does not want the thoughts to go away from
Krishna. One does not want to forget Krishna at all. Earlier, we see that, yes,
one, as a rule, one tries to avoid forgetting of Krish..., forgetting Krishna.
Which is good. But here, one moves forward. And to a deeper realm.
Where "sauharda-abhilasa". One has a very cherished desire. That let Krishna
always be very close to my heart. Let He never go away from my heart. Now, after
this, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport in his summary study:

"After the outward appearance of these ecstatic symptoms, they stay within the
mind, and continuation of the ecstasy is called samādhi."

You know. You know. So, "bhāva" means what? Externally, the symptoms appear. And
then, just like the example is given of fire. You know. So, if I take a road.
And then, I put it in fire. Say, I take a metal road. Then, the road starts
becoming hot. It acquires the characteristics of fire. And as it becomes warmer.
And warmer. And warmer. Hotter. And hotter. And hotter. Then, not only does it
have externally the, you know, hea..., same heat which the fire has. But
actually, internally, also, it undergoes change. So, like that, when a devotee
comes close to Krishna, the symptom is manifest. But along with that symptoms,
the internal ecstasy also co..., appears. And the internal ecstasy stays. So,
then, when that internal ecstasy becomes steady, then that is called as
"samādhi". Now, you know, how is "sam...", the, now, let us look at how
"bhāva-bhakti" is achieved. You know. So, "bhāva-bhakti" is possible by two
ways. By practice. And by mercy. You know. So, by practice. And by mercy. Now,
what do practice means? Practice means sadhana-bhakti. So, we have discussed,
sadhana-bhakti is in two ways. There is "vaidhi" sadhana. And there is
"rāgānugā" sadhana. So, bhakti can be, the perfection can be achieved by
"vaidhi" sadhana. You know. For, as well as by "rāgānugā" sadhana. We can come
towards "bhāva". Now, he exa..., he gives examples for each of these. So, let
us look at the example. Prabhupada, first, for "vaidhi" sadhana, he gives the
example of "Nārada Muni". Of course, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives the example. And
Prabhupada elaborates on it. Now, you know, you know, "Nārada Muni"'s story is
fascinating. Because, you know, he was, you know, you know, he "Nārada Muni"'s
story illustrates so many of the principles of devotional service. And that is
why when "Vyāsadeva" has written all the Vedas. And after that, he is still
dissatisfied. And "Nārada Muni" wanted him to glorify pure devotional service.
So, this is described in 1.4. 5. And 6. "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". Fourth. Fifth. And
Sixth Chapters of the First Canto. So, there, "Nārada Muni" tells his own story.
How I came to Krishna Consciousness. "Nārada Muni" tells his, how I came. And
then, when he tells, he, it, he, through his story, demonstrates many of the
principles which the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" will illustrate later on. Throughout
its thousands of verses. So, one of those principles is that he was from a very
low birth. He was born as a maidservant's child. And, you know, there is no
mention of the father of "Nārada Muni". You know. And yet, you know, we see the,
you know, you know, this maidservant, she is, still had, whatever be her
background, she still had an attitude of a devotional service. You know.
Service. Dispositions she had. And when these great Bhaktivedantas came, she
served the Bhaktivedantas. And seeing his mother, he also served them. And he
served them very digilently. He, so, that service were gratefruit. And they gave
instructions. He heard very carefully. Those instructions. And he even:

        ucastha lepan anu moditod vijay

He took their mahaprasad, also. And then, later on, when his mother passed away,
so, he decided that, let me follow what the Bhaktivedantas have told. Let me,
you know, go towards the north. And go, you know, give, become detached from
everything material. And absorb myself in Krishna. And when he did that, he saw,
for practice rigidly. So, now, when he practiced, started doing rigid practice,
Krishna appeared once. And then, Krishna disappeared. And when Krishna
disappeared, then what happened? You know. You know. Then, when Krishna
disappeared, you know, he was desperate. Oh. Please come. Please, I want to see.
Try to sit. And do meditation again. And try to replicate what he had done
earlier. Hoping that he will be able to see Krishna again. But when he, he could
not see Krishna, then he had, became very desperate. Almost devastated. And
then, he heard a voice. You know. You know. Practic..., keep, keep practicing
diligently throughout this life. And then, your future life, you will become,
you will have my constant association. You will be able to see Me. You will not
be able to see Me in this life. But your practice will purify. And then, what
happened? Now, you know, the, this was not "Nārada Muni". This was "Nārada" boy.
That means, in his previous life, who he was. So, this "Nārada", what did he do?
Determinedly practiced. Determinedly, you know, practiced bhakti. And by the
practice of bhakti, determinedly, he eventually attained perfection. Such a
perfection. That Srila Prabhupada says, he is supremely liberated. Even, he can
come in the material world. He can go out of the material world to the spiritual
world. Whenever he wants. And he can just fly. Not just fly. Even our airplanes,
or even the spacecrafts, that are there, if they have to fly, they need so much
planning. You know. They need fuel. They have to check the engine. And they have
to check the techni..., check the technical function of everything. And only
then, one can move. But "Nārada Muni" just desires. And right from "Pitra Loka",
he can just transfer himself to Svarga Loka. And he can come so quickly. You
know. Nobody can even detect him. Just right there immediately. So, he got,has
got such a freedom. So, he attained this. And "Nārada Muni" is completely
absorbed in love for Krishna. You know. So, how did he attain this? This was by,
you know, "vaidhi-bhakti". So, by diligent practice of sadhana-bhakti, he
attained, or of "vaidhi" sadhana-bhakti. He attained the stage of spontaneous
love for Krishna. Now, this spontaneous, this perfection of love, that is, you
know, ecstatic love as Prabhupada translates it. "bhāva-bhakti". Now, after
describing this example of "bhāva", then, you know, you know, Prabhupada writes,
now, how does one achieve "bhāva"? Prabhupada explains this:

"when a realized soul who is engaged in the service of the Lord is speaking, he
has the potency to inject spiritual life within the audience. One should,
therefore, seek the association of such pure, unalloyed devotees, and by such
association and service a neophyte devotee will certainly develop attachment,
love and devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead."

You know. So, what will happen? Here, he recommends primarily hearing. "Nārada
Muni" heard. So, now, we may say that "Nārada Muni" only heard for four months
in, "Cāturmāsa" was there. But what he heard, those words, he took them like
treasures into his heart. And he cherished them over there. And he remembered
them. Those words echoed in his heart. And he molded his own life according to
what he had heard. You know. So, now, so, he had to know about practice to
achieve realisation. But the seed for that practice was in the words that he
had heard. Those words became the map for his life. So, hearing is very
important. And when we hear from Srila Prabhupada, we hear from the great
devotees, then that inspires us. And that, you know, that inspire, inspiration
may be conscious in terms of, yes, I feel like I should do it. Or it is also
subconscious in the sense that just by hearing those devotees, their desires are
getting transferred to us. And when those desires are transferred to us, they
become our desires. Our desires become purified that way. And that is how by
"vaidhi-bhakti", one can get to "bhāva-bhakti". Then, by "rāgānugā-bhakti",
Prabhupada gives the example of a lady in, from, name "Chandrakanti". This is
from the "Padma Purāṇa". So, this "Chandrakanti", you know, you know, what
happened? She, the "Padma Purāṇa" describes this ana..., this incident. That,
you know, she came once to a temp..., she, she was herself a devotee. But then,
she, that day, once she came to a temple. And she saw a beautiful deity of
Krishna. And when she saw the deity of Krishna, she was so a warmed by ecstasy.
She just started dancing. Dancing with the view, own mother. The divine sort of
madness. And she, normally, when we dance in kirtan, we may, may dance for five
minutes. Ten minutes. Fifteen  minutes. After that, we get tired. Physically,
the body can only do so much, you know, dancing. But then, when this
"Chandrakanti", which, she was not dancing at a physical level. She was infused
with spiritual energy. And without stopping, she danced for the entire night.
Entire night. And what happened? Actually, because, here, the, it was not a
"vaidhi". It was not that sometimes when kirtans are going on, we are all told,
you should dance. And then, because it is a discipline. We are told to dance, we
dance. That would be "vaidhi" dancing. But here, she was dancing. There was
nobody telling her to dance. She was just, you know, attract..., she was just so
charmed by the beauty of Krishna, as the, in the deity form. That she was just,
got captivated. And, and she started dancing. Dancing. Dancing. And she got
actually the mood of Kri..., you know, of the gopis of Vrindavan. So, just as
the gopis were dancing with Krishna, and the gopis were dancing for Krishna. In
the rasa-lila has, rasa dance has many aspects to it. Sometimes, Krishna, so,
so, she was dancing for Krishna's pleasure. And she kept dancing throughout the
night. And that dancing throughout the night, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" explains is
indicating of her development of "rāgānugā-bhakti". She was dancing. You know.
Sorry, not "rāgānugā-bhakti". "bhāva-bhakti". She has come to the level of
ecstatic love. And by, and energised by that ecstatic love, she is dancing
constantly. Fervently. With unceasingly, throughout the whole night. And then,
you know, in the next chapter, we will see, also, how this "bhāva-bhakti" is
characteristic of, this is, the, this, the, her example of "bhāva-bhakti",
char..., it, this, exhibits one characteristic. It is called as
"avyartha-kālatvaṁ". So, "kāla" is time. "vyartha" is to waste. "avyartha" is
to not waste. So, "avyartha-kālatvaṁ" means to not waste any time at all. So,
she was so ecstatic. That she did not want to waste one moment in anything else.
She just wanted to dance. Dance. And dance more. That is "avyartha-kālatvaṁ".
And then, you know, and "bhāva" can also be achieved by mercy. So, now, we
discussed "bhāva" by practice. In practice, there was "vaidhi". And
"rāgānugā-bhakti". Now, we come to mercy. Now, Srila Prabhupada explains:

"simply by speaking, simply by glancing and simply by good wishes."

So, you know, this refers to "vacika". "darsana-dana". And "harda". This is what
is mentioned over here. By words. By glances. And by good wishes. So, by words.
By glances. And by good wishes. What does that mean? That sometimes, the Lord
may speak. You know. I bless you. And that, those, that, those words of
blessing comprise, or they include the potency by which, the devotee becomes
infused with "bhāva-bhakti". And as a reference, you know, quot..., discussion
between Krishna and "Nārada Muni" is quoted, Where Krishna tells "Nārada Muni"
that I bless you with unalloyed devotion. So, now, we may say that, actually,
you know, just now, it was said that, Narada Muni has attained perfection to
"vaidhi-bha...", through "vaidhi-bhakti". So, through, then how is it the same,
how is same thing even for "kṛpā" over here? You know. That "rāgānugā", the
"bhāva-bhakti" being attained by "kṛpā". Through "vacika". You know. No. It is
not exactly talking about "Nārada Muni". It is talking about the principle. This
quote from Krishna. Krish..., this quote is given. Where Krishna is making this
statement that I bless you with devotion. So, it is Krishna speaking those
words. They are tantamount. They are performative utterances. Performative
utterances means when they are spoken, the action will happen. Just like when
our judge says, let this prisoner be hanged. It is a performative utterance.
That means that utterance will lead to the performance of some action. Now, if
an ordinary citizen says, let this person be hanged. Nothing will happen. So,
that person does not have the power. So, when a per..., so, that means, what,
the words that are spoken by Krishna, because He is omnipotent. You know. They
have powers. When Krishna is "vacika". Krishna says, may your help your
devotion. Then, that person will get pure devotion by that. That means "vacika".
And then, there is "darsana-dana". "darsana-dana" means, you know, so, there is
another reference given. Of how, you know, the, you know, devotees of
"Jāṅgam...", Desha, you know, of, "Jāṅgala Desha". So, what happened? The
inhabitants, you know, what happened to them was, that "Jāṅgala", rather, you
know, they, what happened to them was that they, you know, got the darshan of
the Lord. And here, Prabhupada quotes over here. You know. You know. So, here,
Prabhupada is quoting one by one. The inh...:

“When the inhabitants of Jāṅgala Province saw the Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa,
they were so stricken with feeling that they could not withdraw their glance
from Him.”

You know. You know. They could not withdraw their glance. So, here, what is the,
what is he talking about? What is a stricken? Stricken with feeling. Now,
normally, with the word stricken is used in negative sense, is stricken with, we
say grief-stricken. But then, this is, the stricken, basically, does not have to
be used in a negative sense. Here, it is used in a positive sense. Here, the
stricken means, where there is extreme intensity in the feeling. The word
stricken is used. So, the devotees, you know, you know, they are so stricken
with feeling. In the sense that they are completely captivated by attraction to
Krishna. So, when the devotees of the jungle province, when they saw Krishan,
so, they did not have "bhāva-bhakti". At, before they saw Him. But when they got
the darshan of the Supreme Lord, then just by beholding, just, the
all-attractive beauty of the Supreme Lord, they became attracted. And they
developed "bhāva" over there. That is the example given. And then, there can be,
you know, "harda". "harda" means by heartfelt blessing. You know. That heartfelt
blessing can come from the Lord. Or that can even come from the devotee. So,
here, the example is given of "Śukadeva Gosvāmī". You know. You know. So,
"Śuka":

"in the Śuka-saṁhitā"

It is being quoted:

"where Nārada tells Śrīla Vyāsadeva,"

“You have a son who is the greatest devotee of the Personality of Godhead, and I
can observe that without any following of the regulative principles of
devotional service, he is already enriched with many of the symptoms achieved by
the execution of devotional service after many, many births.”

So, what does this mean? This means, you know, now, we know that, you know,
"Śukadeva Gosvāmī" was in the womb for a long time. And he, because he was so
concerned that if I am coming to the world, there is maya. And that maya will
interact me. So, better I stay inside the womb, only. I will not come out only.
Then, actually, "Vyāsadeva" told no. You will not come out. You will get
trapped. You will not get trapped. He said no. He was, still was not ready to
come. Then, "Vyāsadeva" beseeched the Lord. And the Lord came. And gave an
assurance. That you will not get entangled. Now, you can come out. So, at that
time, that, that is described. So, the Lord also told "Vyā...", "Vyāsadeva"
that, actually, your son is ex..., exhbiting very great love of God. And that
love of God, which is being exhibited, you know, that as how do they get it? So,
it is equiva..., it is equialent of the love of God that is developed after many
lifetimes of practice. So, how has that love of God come about? It has come
about by the practice of, it has come about by "kṛpā". So, hard. This is, Lord
blessed "Śukadeva Gosvāmī". You know, And that is how "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" got
that ecstatic love of God. Now, after this, you know, then there are further
examples. Of love of God coming about in mysterious ways. You know. You know.
So, now, there have to, he says, the harder can be from the Lord. And the harder
can be from the devotee. So, now, here, here, there is this, you know, you know,
"Nārada" is addressing "Yudhiṣṭhira".

"it is very difficult to describe the character of Prahlāda."

And then, you know, so what he is tell..., this example is, this example might
not seem very clear. But, you know:

"This is called"

Prabhupada writes over there:

"This is called natural attraction. It is caused by the special grace of the
Personality of Godhead or by the special grace of a great devotee like Nārada."

So, what this means is, you know, that, you know, you know, here, what is
happening is, "Nārada Muni" has got such great devotion. Now, how did "Prahlāda"
get that devotion? "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is explaining here that when "Nārada" was in
the womb. When "Nārada" was instructing. You know. You know. You know.
"Prahlāda"s mother. "Ka...", "Hiranyakashipu"'s wife. Along with that,
"Prahlāda" was in the womb. And "Nārada Muni" was the well-wisher of both. And
"Nārada Muni" did, wished that, you know, this child. Let him be a great
devotee. And then, what happened was, by that, the great devotion of "Prahlāda"
manifested. And similar, another example that is given here is of "Mṛgāri". So,
"Mṛgāri" was also, you know, he was such a terrible demon. But, you know, but
when "Vyā...", "Nārada Muni" saw, why is he killing, how, and why is not killing
animals like that? Not only killing, half-killing animals like this. Such a
terrible thing to do. And "Nārada Muni" desired, let, let this be reformed. Let
this person be reformed. And then, what happened was, we know, "Mṛgāri" became
such a transformed person that he was not even ready to hurt ants. That is the
tremendous character change that can come about in a person by the blessing of
great devotees. So, "harda". You know. That is by heartfelt blessings. So, now,
in this chapter, what all have we discussed? We discussed the definition of
"bhāva-bhakti". Then, we have discussed the, you know, you know, primary and
secondary characteristic of "bhāva-bhakti". Then, we have discussed the, you
know, ways in which "bhāva-bhakti" can be attained. So, the primary
characteristic of "bhāva-bhakti" was that it is, "śuddha-sattva" decends. And
the second characteristic is "citta-masṛṇya-". That there is the, you know,
experience of various emotions. "rasas". "citta-masṛṇya-". Softening of the
heart that happens. And then, how does "bhāva-bhakti" come about? It can come
about by, you know, by sadhana-bhakti. Or it can come out by "kṛpā". In
sadhana-bhakti, how, what sort of sadhana-bhakti can it bring it, bring it
about? It can come about by "vaidhi" sadhana-bhakti. Or by "rāgānugā"
sadhana-bhakti. And when it comes to "kṛpā", it can be "vacika". The Lord may
speak it. And then, by that, it may happen in "darsana-dana". The Lord may give
darshan. And that may captivate the heart of a devotee. Or it may be "harda".
There may be heartfelt blessing that may be given. Even when there is no
utterance of that is blessing, blessing directly. So, this "harda" is different
from "vacika". Because in these cases, you know, you know, "Nārada" and
"Prahlāda". Or "Nāra...", you know, "Nārada" and "Mṛgāri". Or even before that.
The Lord and "Śukadeva", there was no direct speeking of the Lord with that
devotee. For the Lord just communicates, you know, you know, actually, the, most
of the time, parc..., "Prahlāda" is in the womb. And even "Śukadeva" is in the
womb. "Śukad...", "Śukadeva" is not yet Goswami at that time. He is just baby
"Śukadeva" at that time. So, he is in the womb. So, there is no direct. No
talking between the two, also. But the, just the desire that also, it is enough
for the ecstatic love of Godhead to mani..., love of God to manifest. So, now,
after discussing this, let us go to the next chapter. So, what happens in the
next chapter?

This is characteristic, "Character of One In Ecstatic Love". You know. You know.
You know. Now, this is a very important chapter. Because this will differentiate
between, so, there are nine characteristics that are described over here. And we
will look at the sanskrit words, also, as "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has used it. And these
characteristics, what is the importance of these characteristics to understand?
That actually, you know, when we say "citta-masṛṇya-". "citta-masṛṇya-" means
softness of the heart. You know. You know. So, softness of the heart can lead to
tears. You know. And, you know, one may say, oh, this person is having so much
tears. This person must be very advanced. Must be having a lot of love of God.
So, what happens is, how do we know this? How can we know whether a person has
a deep love of God? Or not? So, is it just by the presence of tears? There are
two dangers with this, you know, equalisation of outer tears with inner exalted
love of God. Inner, you know, with the equalisation of outer tears with inner,
you know, you know, presence of ecstat..., exalted, ecstatic love of God.
Because it is possible that there may be imitators, who may somehow get some
tears. And they are getting those tears, not because they have love for God. But
because they want the prestige. In the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", there are
incidents. You know. When "Haridāsa Thakur" would be in ecstasy, there was a
snake charmer. That person would be playing. And then, "Haridāsa Thakur" 40:05
