Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4qo8p22MqBQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=4qo8p22MqBQ&redir_token=oIdQQWCl5IPnO3vPXWjWX1wJYL18MTU0ODQ5MDU5MkAxNTQ4NDA0MTky&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_160_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_16_-_Raganuga_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhakti, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
discussing the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And we now are discussing
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, the wave which talked about, you know, the ocean is
divided into parts. So, in the Eastern ocean, there is a wave which talks about
"vaidhi-bhakti". In fact, so, in the "vaidhi-bhakti", that "vaidhi-bhakti" got,
got over in the 14th Chapter. And 15th and 16th Chapters talk about, you know,
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, now, "vaidhi" and "rāgānugā", both are parts of
"sadhana-bhakti". So, let us look at "rāgānugā-bhakti" further. Now, in the
quick recap of the previous chapter to, you know, you know, you know, continue
our discussion from there. You know. "rāgānugā". And "rāgātmikām". So,
"rāgātmikām" is the bhakti, it is the p..., we could put it, "rāgātmikām" and
"rāgānugā" as, "rāgātmikām" is the perfection of spontaneous devotion. And
"rāgānugā" is the practice of spontaneous devotion. So, "rāgātmikām" means, say,
the devotee, like Yashoda Mayi, she, for her, "rāgā", his, her, is the "ātmā".
He is filled with spontaneous attraction for Krishna. So, the word "rāgā", here,
is, refers to spontaneous attraction. And a devotee who wants to serve in the
mood of Yashoda Mayi, that devotee will be, said to be "rāgānugā". Means that
devotee is doing practice to develop spontaneous devotion. So, there is the, you
know, "rāgātmikām". That is the perfection of spontaneous devotion. "rāgānugā"
is the practice of spontaneous devotion. "ānugā". "ānugā" means to follow. Now,
in the footsteps of. You know. And there, we were discussing, while we were
discussing about, you know, "rāgānugā-bhakti", we discussed, you know, about
"rāgātmikām" bhakti. And based on the "Bhāgavatam" shloka where, how
different devotees attained perfection by absorption in Krishna. So, there, we:

        gopyaḥ kāmād bhayāt kaṁso
        dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ

So, like, like that, that verse, when we discussed, you know, you know:

        sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehād
        yūyaṁ bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho

So, there, when we discussed these different categories. So, different devotees.
So, we discussed how the devotees, who are in, you know, various categories. If
the mood is unfavorable, that is, say, "bhayāt". Or "dveṣāc". Then, that is not
the nature in which anybody will be serving in the spiritual world. So, that is
not "rāgātmikām" bhakti. And similarly, the "Pāṇḍavas". And the devotees, like
"Nārada", they are not always serving in the mood of spontaneous devotion. They
may be in awareness of the, unaware..., awareness of the greatness of the Lord.
And there may be awe and reverence. Which leads to serving in the mood and duty.
And therefore, the "rāgātmikām" bhaktas are primarily "sambandha-rūpā". Which
are the "Dwarka vasis". They are related with the Lord. Now, and, and there are
"kāmā-rūpā". They are the "Vraja vasis". Especially, the gopis. They are not
directly related with the Lord. But they serve the Lord spontaneously, really.
Out of their attraction. And then, we discussed how that attraction is not
material attraction. It is spiritual. It is, you know, you know, you know, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" gives, you know, repeats the example which is also given by "Krishna
Dasa Kaviraja Goswami". Both of them talk about similar concepts. That one is
selfish. Lust is selfish. Love is selfless. So, the example, which is given, is
lust is like copper. And love is like gold. So, lust and love, you know, seem,
can seem similar. They can seem similar. Because if, you know, copper is
gold-coated. Then, it can appear to be shining like gold. But then, once a, if
the copper plate, which is gold-coated, appears to be like gold. But then, if it
is exposed to some hot temperature. Or it is exposed to some rough surface.
Then, the gold-coating comes off. And then inner copper gets revealed. So, like
that, sometimes, love may seem to be selfless. Or lust may seem to be selfless.
But once some difficulties come up, the heat comes up. Heat of challenges.
Difficulties. Troubles comes up. Then, the selfish core gets reveleaed. Gets
exposed. Rather. And then, that seem to be not love. But lust. So, there is a
difference between love and lust. You know. You know. Now, after discussing
this, then we also discussed how, you know, we have to be careful abut this
"kāmā-rūpā". Not mistake it to be material. Not mistake it to be, you know, this
worldly pleasure. And then, after that, now, in this chapter, let us look at
chapter, you know, you know, 16 over here. "Spontaneous Devotion Further
Described". So, what? In this "Spontaneous Devotion Further Described", so,
Prabhupada writes:

"In the attitude of the denizens of Vṛndāvana, such as Nanda Mahārāja and mother
Yaśodā, is to be found the ideal transcendental concept of being the father and
mother of Kṛṣṇa, the original Personality of Godhead."

So, "the ideal transcendental concept of being the father and mother". So, that
is true, ideal conception. And that they have the spontaneous love. You know.
Now, what is the "ELIGIBILITY FOR SPONTANEOUS DEVOTIONAL SERVICE"? So, to
understand this, you know, Prabhupada writes first of all that we have to go
beyond "anartha-nivṛtti". Which means the disappearance of all material
contamination. So, let us try to understand this. Now, we know the nine stages
of the progression of bhakti. So, "śraddhā". "sādhu-saṅgaḥ". "bhajana-kriyā".
"anartha-nivṛttiḥ". Then, "niṣṭhā". Then, there is "ruciḥ". "āsaktiḥ". "bhāvaḥ".
And "prema". So, what is the qualification for practicing "rāgānugā-bhakti"? One
has to go beyond "anartha-nivṛtti". One has to come to the level of "niṣṭhā".
So, so, one starts with "śraddhā". "sādhu-saṅgaḥ". "bhajana-kriyā". So, this
"bhajana-kriyā", which we will talk about, and in the "sādhu-saṅgaḥ" that is
talked about, that is "vaidhi-bhakti". So, the impetus is by "vidhi", is by
rules. Yes. This is what one must do. Because these are the rules. One starts
with "vaidhi-bhakti". And then, after that, one moves forward. So, once one
"anartha-nivṛttiḥ" is done, then one comes to "niṣṭhā". And then, one can start
practicing "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, you know, "rāgānugā-bhakti", now, we have to,
important, it is important to understand it is also in the jurisdiction of
sadhana. Sometimes, with, we think that "rāgānugā" is actually, it is, it is
"bhāvaḥ". Or "prema". No. "bhāvaḥ" bhakti is the eighth stage. "prema" bhakti is
the ninth stage. Whereas "rāgānugā" is something which comes within the earlier
stages, only. So, it is a part of "vaidhi-bhakti". And it is important to
understand this point. Because sometimes, "rāgānugā" itself is mistaken to be
the goal. But it is not the goal. It is a part of the process. So, to understand
"rāgānugā" more clearly, Srila Prabhupada describes it in his summary study. We
will look at the sans..., the relevant sanskrit verses. Which come in the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And then, we will under..., we will look at the
concept of "rāgānugā-bhakti" better. So, Prabhupada mentions over here, you
know, that before we go to there, there:

"there is a stage called anartha-nivṛtti, which means the disappearance of all
material contamination."

So, without giving this "anartha-nivṛtti", you know, so, Prabhupada says, one:

"When one is actually spontaneously attracted to the loving principles of the
gopīs, there will be found no trace of any mundane contamination in his
character."

You know. You know. So, you know, if somebody is having mundane chara...,
attraction, then that person is not qualified for "rāgānugā-bhakti". We have
discussed earlier how, you know, the attract..., male-female attraction in this
world is like the reflection of the mango in a river. And the transcendental
attraction between Krishna and the gopis, that is like the mango in the ri...,
in the real mango. Above the river. On the tree. So, by jumping into the river
towards the reflection, one will only breaks, one, one's head if one hits a rock
under water. One will not get the mango. One has to come out of the river. And
then, climb up the tree. And then, reach the mango. So, as long as one is in
material illusion, one no longer has the tendency for material sexual
attraction. That means that one is jumping into the river. And one is going into
the river, then one cannot climb up the tree. And get the mango. So,
"anartha-nivṛtti" means, one understands that, ok, there is nothing in this
reflection. That the "anartha" is what? What does the word "anartha" mean?
"artha" means meaning. "anartha" means that which has no meaning. So, "anartha"s
cause us to see meaning where there is no meaning. What does "anartha" do?
"anartha" makes us see "artha" where the is no "artha". That is "anartha". So,
where there is no mango, you know, the "anartha" makes us see, oh, there is
a mango over there. There is pleasure over here. And that is how, we are
infatuated. So, "anartha-nivṛtti". Retirement of anarthas. "nivṛtti". The word
is used for retirement. So, retirement of anarthas means what? There are two
aspects to it. The, that the anarthas get retired. And we retire from the
service of the anarthas. So, first, we have to retire from the service of the
anarthas. Then, the anarthas will get retired. You know. You know. That means,
we have to start saying no to the anarthas. The lust comes and proposes. Why
don't you do this? Why don't you do? Come on. Enjoy. So, it is no. No.
Actually, of course, we do not stay busy saying no. No. No. We focus on saying
yes to Krishna. And that yes to Krishna fills our mind so much. That
automatically, a no to mMaya, no to the anarthas comes up. And eventually, when
we keep saying no. No. No. No. Again. And again. Then, what happens? Anarthas
see that, ok, the, here, there is no scope. This person is not going to fall to
my temptation. Anarthas go away. Just like, sometimes, some sales person comes
along. And say, he knocks on the door. Would you like to have this? He says no.
Maybe, after some time, again, would you like to have this? No. Would you like
to have this? No. So, once, twice, thrice. Like that. Once one says no. Once and
for all. Then, that sales person understands. Ok. I am not going to get anything
over here. I will just be completely wasting my time. So, like that. Or some,
another example could be that, suppose we had a, you know, you know, pet dog.
And we love the pet dog. And now, you know, you know, we understood that this
dog has got rabies. Very dangerous. Just by touching it, it may bite us. And
it, it may, and we may get a, get the terrible disease. So, may now understand,
I, I have to give away this dog. I have to push away this dog. So, for a long
time, we were petting, and then, fondling, and caressing that dog. And suddenly,
we push the dog away. The dog says, I, what is happening? Why are you pushing me
away? So, the dog, you know, comes back again. And then, again, we push away.
And then, dog comes back again. And again, we push away. And then, somehow, the
dog comes there. And again waits. And we think, oh, this dog is so nice. Once in
a while, if I fondle it, it does not matter. But if once we fondle it, then what
happens? The dog starts seeing, oh, my master still loves me. And then, ten
times, also, if we say, push the dog away. Still, the dog, last time, the master
fondled me. So, master is simply playing with me. And later on, he will accept
me. So, what, way out, what has to be done is, the dog has to be pushed away.
And nothing doing. No fondling. Just every time it comes, push it away. Push it
away. Push it away. Then, only, the pers..., dog will understand, oh, this
person does not want me. And then, the dog will go away. So, that is how lust
also works. You know. Like a petting, like a dog, which had been made into a
pet. Lust is like that. You know. We had ourselves adopted lust. When we are
materialistic, we try to find newer and newer ways to stimulate and agitate the
imagination with lust. And therefore I get some pleasure. So, we have fondled,
and caressed, and embraced lust. And then, when we understand, oh, oh, it is:

        mahāśano mahā-pāpmā
        viddhy enam iha vairiṇam

This is an enemy. This enemy, we have to give it up. Then, when we start, ok,
no. No. I will not indulge in it. So, you know, so, lust proposes. We say no.
Again, it says, no. Again, we say no. And then, finally, what happens? After a
few times of saying no, then somehow, we say yes. And then, oh, this person is
still, is ready to enjoy. There is a lot of scope to pro..., persuade this
person. And then, I, again, lust starts proposing forcefully. You know. So,
"anartha-nivṛtti" means a firm and persistent no. No means no. Nothing doing
means nothing doing. So, when that sort of "nivṛtti" happens, we retire from the
service of lust. And then, once and for all, it is a permanent retirement. It is
an irreversible retirement. And then, after that, re..., lust retires from
making its proposals to us. But lust will not retire before that. In fact, lust
will only do that afterwards. First, lust, first we have to retire from itself.
Is, then, lust will become tired of its proposals. And then, after it becomes
tired, then it will retire. So, that how, that is how it is to move forward. So,
"anartha-nivṛtti". Without "anartha-nivṛtti", to imagine oneself to be at the
level of, you know, spontaneous devotion is sahajiyaic. So, the, so, there are
people who, you know, are, as Prabhupada writes, they are having, act..., they
talk and act as if they are in Gopi Bhava. But then, they are, there is so
much male-female attraction over there. So, that is, that is a travesty. It is
actually a great, you know, atrocity against the exalted principles of, you
know, devotion which "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is talking about over here. Now, so,
Prabhupada was very cautious. And he put, even "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura" put "Rāgamārga". He says this is, this is what? You know. Puja for us.
It is to be worshipped by us. It is a very exalted "mār...", position. Although,
it is not the position of "prema". Still, it is an exalted position. And we
should respect it. And put it in a position of reverence. And by that, we can
gradually take it up. Gradually, if, as we become spiritually advanced, we will
develop that "rāga-bhakti". You know. So, now, coming to the point that
"rāgā-bha...", "rāgānugā" is also a part of "sadhana-bhakti". You know. So, just
as in "rāgātmikām", there was "sambandha-rūpā". And there was, you know,
"kāmā-rūpā". So, like that, here, also, there is "sambandha-rūpā". And
"kāmā-rūpā". So, we will go to that. But before that, let us look at, you know,
some of the concepts about "rāgānugā-bhakti". Which, you know, we are going to
talk about over here. So, here, Prabhupada talks about "siddha-praṇālī". So,
"siddha-praṇālī", what it is. And how it is mistaken. You know.

"They imagine that they have become associates of the Lord simply by thinking of
themselves like that. This external behavior is not at all according to the
regulative principles."

So, now, Srila Prabhupada, in these sentences, has concentrated a depth of
meaning. And to unpack this, let us look at the sanskrit verses of the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". You know. So, before that, Srila Prabhupada mentions
"No Necessity of Discussing Further". Then, he says that 16:05
