Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2N1HDN-a6w
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_162_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_19_-_Prema_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=a9gzg57F-YhfFCwYWj3xsKDAvwl8MTU0ODQ5MDY0M0AxNTQ4NDA0MjQz&event=video_description&v=O2N1HDN-a6w

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our, the last class of the Bhakti Shastri course,
We will be discussing Chapter 19 of "The Nectar of Devotion". So, before we go
into the chapter, let us, you know, once have an overview. Or a review of the
journey that we have gone through in "The Nectar of Devotion". Let us look at
the Eastern wave. Or the Eastern ocean. So, it is called
"Bhagavad-Bhakti-Bheda". The varieties of devotional service. So, among the four
sides of the ocean, we are covering, in our Bhakti Shastri course, this Eastern
Ocean only. So, in this, the first wave was Samanya-Bhakti. Samanya-Bhakti is
overview of devotional service. This was introduction and Chapter 1 of "The
Nectar of Devotion". That Introduction in Chapter 1 means, that we discussed,
you know, the Introduction. And then, the six characteristics of pure devotional
service. So, you know, "klesagni". "Subhada". All those things are in the part
of "Samanya-Bhakti". That the second wave was "sadhana-bhakti". Devotional
service in practice. This was Chapters 2 to 16. This was the major part of our
course. So, in this, we start from the first stages of devotion. And eligibility
of the candidate for accepting devotional service. And then, we discussed about
how devotional service, this is primarily a set of quotes. This is about how
bhakti is independent of everything else. And then, from here onwards, the
64, description of the 64 elements starts. From 6th Chapter onwards. Then, it
goes on until 13. Almost in 14, also. 14, Devotional qualifications basically
deals with, you know, the, you know, you know, relationship of bhakti with other
elements. Which have not been included in the 64 items. Then, these two, 15 and
16. These two talk about "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, that is, so, in
"sadhana-bhakti", there are two parts. There is "vaidhi-bhati". And
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, 2 to 14 Chapters are talking about "vaidhi-bhakti". And
15 and 16 are talking about "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, both of them are parts of,
yeah, all of them are parts of, you know, 15 and 16, they are parts of
"vaidhi-bhakti". Now, from here onwards, 17 and 18, which we discussed in our
previous class. They are a part of the third wave. The third wave is called as
"bhāva-bhakti". That is devotional service in ecstasy. So, there is, you know,
three stages of bhakti. "sadhana-bhakti". "bhāva-bhakti". And "prema-bhakti".
They form the second, third and fourth waves of the Eastern Ocean. So, now,
"bhāva-bhakti", we discussed in our previous chapter. And now, we are going to
the fourth wave. Fourth wave is "prema-bhakti", devotional service in love of
God. This is called, the Chapter 19 in "The Nectar of Devotion". This is
"Devotional Service In Pure Love of God". Now, the description in Chapter 19 is
not very detailed. Because Chapter 19, because "prema" and "bhāva" are similar.
"prema" is basically a developed stage of "bhāva". So, whatever analysis is
given for "bhāva", applies, is, is in many ways, similar to the analysis that is
required for "prema". So, now, Prabhupada starts this by describing:

"When one’s desire to love Kṛṣṇa in one’s particular relationship becomes
intensified, this is known as pure love of Godhead."

You know. So, this is love, "pure love of Godhead". Now, let us look at this
from the point of our discussion in this chapter. We will look at the definition
of "prema" over here. So, devotional, fourth wave, "prema-bhakti". Devotional
service. Love of God. So, let us look at the definition that "Rūpa Gosvāmī"
gives.

        samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto
        mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ
        bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā
        budhaiḥ premā nigadyate

So, "budhaiḥ premā nigadyate". "budhaiḥ" means the wise. "nigadyate" means to
call. Or describe. They call this to be "prema". What is that "prema"? So,
"samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto". That means, "samyaṅ" means completely. "samyak", here,
the, when the "sandhiya" happens, it becomes "samyaṅ". "masṛṇita". Completely.
When the heart softens. In "bhāvaḥ", the heart is soft. But in "prema", the
softening complete. then, "masṛṇita-svānto". Compl..., "sva-antaḥ". "ant...",
it, once inside, it is completely soft. And "mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". "mamatvā"
means a sense of ownership. We will discuss what this means. A very significant
one. "ātiśayāṅkitaḥ". "ātiśayāṅkitaḥ" means, "ātiśayā" is a lot. Or abandoned.
"āṅkitaḥ". "āṅkitaḥ" is marked. So, that which is marked with a lot of feeling
of, you know, you know, you know, intense emotion. And "bhāvaḥ sa eva
sāndrātmā". So, "bhāvaḥ", "sānd...", "sānd...", "sāndrā", "sāndrātmā", we
discussed what it means, it means, condensed. Or concentrated. So, so, "budhaiḥ
premā nigadyate". This is called "premā". So, when that "bhāvaḥ" softens the
heart. "samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto".

"‘When that bhāva softens the heart completely"

And then, what happens to "bhāvaḥ"?

"becomes endowed with a great feeling of possessiveness in relation to the Lord"

"mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". It is marked with intense feeling of possessiveness.

"and becomes very much condensed and intensified,"

See, this is, "sa eva sāndrātmā":

"it is called prema [love of Godhead] by learned scholars."

It is, "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", "Madhya", 23.7. And "budhaiḥ premā nigadyate".
This is called as "premā". So, now, in this definition, let us look at again
the, you know, characteristics of this definition. The primary. And the
secondary characteristics. "samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto". So, Prabhupada writes about
this, then now, in his "Nectar of Devotion":

"In the Nārada Pañcarātra it is clearly stated that when lust is completely
transferred to the Supreme Godhead and the concept of kinship is completely
reposed in Him, such is accepted as pure love of God by great authorities like
Bhīṣma, Prahlāda, Uddhava and Nārada."

So, "Nārada Pañcarātra", it says that, the, when, what is happening is, the lust
is, you know, there is a famous prayer of Bhaktivinoda Thakura, where he says,
you know, that my dear Lord, just as, you know, the very intensity, you know,
you know, with which, my mind is attracted to the sense objects, let my nine
object be attracted to You. So, that is, we also discussed one prayer earlier
about how, you know, how a man is attracted to a woman. And a woman to a man.
Similarly, let me be attracted to You. So, this is actually the principle of
devotion. In fact, the principle of pure devotion. You know. Now, so, the,
actually, our material emotions are distortions. Of our original pure spiritual
emotions. So, what we have to do is, we have to draw our emotions back. But
we cannot just draw them back. We cannot live emotionless. So, we direct our
emotions towards Krishna. And when this redirection happens, completely, then
that is, you know, pure love of God. And Pra..., Prabhupada further quotes
"Bhīṣma" over here.

"According to Bhīṣma, love means reposing one’s affection completely upon one
person, withdrawing all affinities for any other person."

So, it is "reposing one’s affection completely upon one person". Now, earlier,
we discussed that aff..., affection for Krishna is not exclusivist. It is not
narrow-minded. Because sometimes, if I say, I love you, and then I say, I do not
love anyone else except you. That would mean that to love you, I have to cut
out, I have to cut out everyone else from my love circle. The, so, that may
happen. But with the, with the, if we love someone only in this world. But when
we love Krishna, because Krishna is connected with everyone. In fact, Krishna
intimately loves everyone. Therefore, when we love Krishna, our love flows
through Krishna to ev... through eve..., to eryone. But the focus is that we
have to focus our love on Krishna. And through Krishna, the love goes to
everyone else. So, that is why, you know, we see "Bhīṣma", he was very
considerate towards, not just the "Pāṇḍava"s. But, you know, he was also
considerate towards, you know, "Duryodhana". He tried to give him good advice.
And tried to gave him, get him, as much as possible. Tried as much as possible
to get him on the right track. So, in that sense, you know, a devotee is not
insensitive. A devotee is very sensitive about various issues. And tries to deal
with them properly. In the, in the, as if, because His love does not get
divorced from everything else. So, now, in this, the primary characteristic of
it, "bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā". That the, you know, what is it? It is when
"bhāvaḥ" becomes condensed. And intensified. It is "premā". It is "premā". When,
so, the, it is very intense feeling of love. And then, what is the, you know,
secondary characteristics? What I described earlier that
"samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto". "samyaṅ". It is complete softening of the heart.
Complete softening of the heart. So, in that sense, you know, it is, and again,
the same point is made. It is an intensification of "bhāvaḥ". But the other
point, point is very significant over here. "mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ".
"mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". This is a significant point. There are two modes of
relationship. You know. Or two moods which will also lead to modes. Two moods in
the relationship. Which is based on "tadiyatva". And "mamatva". "tadiyatva"
means that my dear Lord, I am Yours. "tadiyatva". You know. I am Yours. Now,
this is a very, this is itself an exalted level of surrender. Where one thinks,
you know, I do, we think that I am my own person. You know. I will do what I
want to do. I, I am free. I am independent. Now, you know, that feeling is, we,
it is ok. You know. In one sense, the modern, or post-modern toss male like
celebrate that kind of feeling. But we want that when one says that, you know,
so when we are, that is not a re..., that is not a feeling which is, you know,
conducive to devotion. You know. That is the feeling which is conducive to
bondage. And, you know, a continued existence. Material existence. In material
existence. Because we want to be connected with Krishna, constantly. Therein is
the perfection of our existence. Because in being independent, we may have a
feeling of freedom. But we will not have a feeling of fulfillment. Fulfillment
comes by the reciprocation of love. And for that, we have to have relationships.
And relationships means, there has to be subordination. Ev..., even in this
world, when we, per say, you know, I fall in love. We fall in love each other.
Fall in love. People do not stand in love. They fall in love. Why? Because there
has to be, whenever there is a loving relationship, there has to be
subordination. So, "tadiyatva" means, my dear Lord. I am Yours. So, we see this:

        mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor
        arpilū tuwā pade, nanda-kiśor!

So, like that, Bhaktivinoda Thakur and other "ācārya"s have sung that My dear
Lord, everything, my, I am Yours. And everything that I have is Yours. This is
"tadiyatva". This is an exalted level of surrender. But higher than that is
"mamatvā". Not just that I am Yours, my dear Lord. You are also mine. You are
mine. What that means is, "mamatvā". You know. You are mine. And not just, You
are not just, You are, I am Yours. But You are mine. So, "mamatvā". You know.
"mamatvā". How does that work out? Yashoda Mayi, she is certainly, it is implied
that I am Yours my dear Lord. I am, she does say that I am Yours. But beyond
that, she can, it also implies that "mamatvā" means that I, You are mine.
Because Yashoda Mayi thinks, Krishna is my child. Not only is my child. He is,
actually, I am in, you know, you know, I have to take care of Him. He is mine.
So, she, because she thinks he is my child, so, she has to, you know, he has to
be well-behaved. He, he cannot just go around stealing from anyone. And
everyone. He steals butter. What will happen to his reputation? It is very bad.
So, that "mamatvā" is a very elevated stage of love. And here, we will see,
generally, we may think of possessiveness as bad. You know. It, you know, so
many times in the Bhagavad Gita:

        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sa śāntim adhigacchati

Bhagavad Gita says so many places. You know. So that, you know:

        vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān
        pumāṁś carati niḥspṛhaḥ
        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sa śāntim adhigacchati

So, in 2.71, He says, "nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ". You know. Become, give up the
feeling of "mamaḥ". Of possessiveness. And so, there are two mode..., great, two
modes of our illusion. One is the possessiveness. And the other is the
misindentification. "ahaṅkāraḥ". So that things connected with the body are
mine. And I am the body. So, me. And mine. "ahaṁ mameti". So, now, normally,
"mamatvā" is considered to be very bad. You know. As far as the normal
understanding of spiritual life is concerned. And "mamatvā" has to be given up.
But when we come to a very evolved understanding of spiritual life, you know,
actually, all, the, whatever emotions are there in the material world, they are
distortions. And we want to give up the distortions. But the way to give up the
distortions is by, not just rejecting them, but reverting them. Reverting them
to their original forms. And the, that rever..., reversion, to their original
forms is by, you know, purification. And by the process of devotional service.
So, when, that "mamatvā" is directed towards Krishna, it becomes very, it makes
the relationship very sweet. And intimate. You know. Radharani thinks that
Krishna is my Lord. And that is why if she sees that, she comes to know from
some sa..., some of her gopis that Krishna is with Chandravali. Then, she gets
angry with Krishna. And later on, when Krishna comes, she is angry. She says, if
you do not want to be with her, do not come here then. So, where, what is this?
This is possessiveness for Krishna. And this is very pleasing to Krishna. This
"mamatvā" indicates a very exalted level love of God. And it indicates, most
importantly, that one has got a personal relationship with God. It is an, and it
is not just a, based on a, or a personal, and intimate relationship with God.
You know. When we, you know, you know, think of God in the sense of greatness.
You know. We may think, oh, God is all-powerful. God is all-great. All kind. And
I just have to offer myself to Him. That is "tadiyatva". But "mamatvā" is much
deeper. Where ok, God, the God is great, all-powerful. All-great. But God is my
beloved. And we have a relationship. And in that relationship, there is a
feeling of possessiveness. And just possessiveness. "ātiśayāṅkitaḥ". His intense
possessiveness. Intense possessiveness. In fact, we see the Ratha Yatra
festival. Where the gopis, you know, are, what are they doing? They are taking
Krishna back to Vrindavan. That is the mood of the Ratha Yatra festival. You
know. From Kurukshetra, where the gopis have met Krishna, is their, in their
vision, they have made a cart. And they are pulling Krishna back. So, what is
the, what is the underlying sentiment we handed? You know. Krishna belongs to
Vrindavan. Krishna belongs to us, the "Vraja vasis". And we want Him back in
Vrindavan. You know. So, there, we have, there is "mamatvā". Now, in "mamatvā",
"tadiyatva" is not rejected. "taditva...", "tadiyatva", is present. But it is
subordinated. So, "Bhaktivinoda Thakura", in one of the songs says:

        āmi to’ tomāra,  tumi to’ āmāra,
        ki kāja apara dhane

So, he says, you know, you know, "āmi to’ tomāra". I am Yours, dear Lord. That
is "tadiyatva". I offer myself completely to You. But then, the relationship
with Krishna is not just one-sided. For the relationship to be truly relishable,
it is both-sided. So, "āmi to’ tomāra". Then, "tumi to’ āmāra". That You are all
mine. You are mine. And when I have You, what do I need anything else for? You
are the supreme possession. "ki kāja apara dhane". He says "apara dhane". What
other "dhane"? What other wealth do I need? Apart from You? So, the, so, devotee
is never poverty-stricken. Even when the devotee has nothing materially, he has
Krishna. And Krishna is the supreme possession. So, that way, a devotee is
supremely, you know, wealthy in that sense. It is a very exalted and intimate
feeling of proprie..., almost like proprietorship over the Lord. But that is the
nature of love. When love is there, you know, it is not proprietorship in the
sense of, you know, wanting to restrict the freedom of someone else. Or wanting
to dominate someone else. But it is more in the sense of, you know, loving sense
of mutual belonging. So, I belong to You. You belong to me. And that is how love
becomes very intimate. And intense. So, "tadiyatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". Now, let us
move forward. Now, if we want to look at this further, there are two ways of
achieving "premā". One is by the maturation of "bhāva". And the second is by the
Lord's extraordinary mercy. So, here, this repeated mathematically, dramat...,
diagrammatically. Sorry. So, "premā" can come by mercy. That is "kṛpa". And it
can come from "bhāva". So, mercy is completely causeless. And mercy is
causeless. And supr..., it is just, need directly over there. And "bhāva", you
know, now, we have discussed earlier, "bhāva" can come from "vaidhi". And
"rāgānugā". And accordingly, the "premā" can be called as "vaidhi-bhavottho".
And "rāgānugiya-bhavattho". "rāgānugiya-bhavattho". So, that means what? From
"vaidhi" to "bhāva". And then, from there, one has come to "premā". And then,
from "rāgānugā" to "bhāva". And from there, to "premā". So, in that way, both
ways, one can come to "premā". So, this, Srila Prabhupada describes, from
"vaidhi":

“A devotee, in the course of executing the regulative principles of devotional
service, develops his natural Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and being thus softened at
heart he chants and dances like a madman."

And:

"While performing chanting of the holy name of the Lord, he sometimes cries,
sometimes talks wildly, sometimes sings and sometimes – without caring for any
outsider – dances like a madman."

You know. So:

        evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā

So, it is the famous verse in the Eleventh Canto. The, Prabhupada is
paraphrasing this verse over here in melody. This is being quoted by "Rūpa
Gosvāmī". Yes. "sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā". And then, means, means, glories the
Lord. And what is the mood in glorifying? "loka-bāhyaḥ". One does not care for
anyone else. He is completely intoxicated. Maddened by love of God. And such
sort of intoxication, maddening is the perfection of, you know, you know, love
of God. Now, the, this perfection of love of God, what happens is, the devotee
does not care for anything else. And this is the "vaidh...", "vaidhi-bhavottho".
So, "vaidhi-bhavottho" means through "vaidhi-bhakti", one gets to "bhāva". And
then, one gets to "premā". And why were we discussing about "bhāva"? We
discussed a couple of points. Which I would like to refer back. And then, we
will move forward in the, to "rāgānugiya-bhavattho". So, sometimes, we discussed
about how some devotees may feel spiritual emotions. So, if saying, young
sadhakas feel spiritual emotions 20:23
